Chapter 9 Power and borders
9.1 What is meant by sovereignty and territorial integrity?
Key idea
• The world political map of sovereign nation-states is dynamic
The world political map shows territories of sovereign nation-states. These are spatially bounded areas of land,
which physically define independent, self-governing countries. These political units are the dominant entity in the
global political system and are considered to be the most important form of spatial governance.
The dynamic nature of the map is demonstrated by the formation of new countries since 1990. Examples
include:
• South Sudan seceded from Sudan in 2011, following protracted civil war; border regions such as Abyei remain
contested (see South Sudan case study, page 291).
• Eritrea gained independence from Ethiopia in 1993 following years of armed conflict.
• Fifteen new countries in eastern Europe and central Asia were formed by secession from the USSR following
the demise of the communist regime there in 1991 (Figure 9.1).
• Germany achieved unity in 1990 as a result of political, economic and social reunification of East (GDR) and
West (FRG) Germany.
• The area of former Yugoslavia has seven countries today; the division, in 1990, was based on political, economic
and ethnic factors. These Balkan states include Kosovo, recognised as independent by most other countries.
• East Timor gained full status as an independent sovereign state in 2002 (Figure 9.2, page 272), following
annexation by Indonesia in 1975.
• The Republic of Yemen replaced the Yemen Arab Republic (North) and the People’s Democratic Republic of
Yemen (South) in 1990; this was partly to exploit oil fields either side of the former border (see Yemen case
study, page 284).
• The Czech Republic and Slovakia became independent states after the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993,
following the ‘Velvet Revolution’.
Figure 9.1 Political map of eastern Europe and central Asia following the breakdown of the former
USSR
Figure 9.2 Location of East Timor. The dispute between East Timor and Australia over access to
the rich oil and gas reserves in the Timor Sea was resolved, under UNCLOS, by the Timor Sea
Treaty 2018; this included a median line maritime boundary drawn up between the Timor and
Australian coasts
The significance of these border changes is far more than a matter of territory. They affect sovereignty over
populations and physical resources; they influence the economy and social geography of each area, including
ethnic groups. And they influence global patterns of trade, and migration, internal and international, for each new
country.
The world political map also shows disputed international borders. Examples in South Asia include the
claims of India, Pakistan and China in the Jammu and Kashmir area, and the Arunachal Pradesh border between
India and China (Figure 9.3).
Stretch and challenge
East Timor (Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste) declared its independence from Portugal in 1975 but
nine days later was invaded by Indonesia. Following many years of conflict, it became a fully
independent state in 2002.
Investigate:
a Reasons for East Timor seeking independence
b The role of the UN in East Timor before and after independence
c Social and economic change in East Timor since independence. See UN data at
http://data.un.org/en/index.html.
Figure 9.3 Disputed borders in South Asia
In addition to disintegration caused by secession, the world political map has also changed through processes of
integration. Examples of politically strong and economically important groups of countries include:
• regional trade blocs such as the EU – although the UK is no longer a member state, the EU had recently
expanded by the accessions of Croatia in 2013, Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 and ten other states in 2004
• global organisations such as the UN, IMF, World Bank and WTO
• G20 (Group of Twenty) and G7 (Group of Seven) – Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK and USA.
Definitions of state, nation, sovereignty and territorial
integrity
The terms state, nation, sovereignty and territorial integrity are fundamental in understanding the world political
map, the global political system, and the challenges faced in the twenty-first century.
State
The term state refers to the area of land, of an independent country, with well-defined boundaries, within which
there is a politically organised body of people under a single government. States therefore are political entities that
have territories over which the body politic exercises sovereignty.
States have the following characteristics:
• Defined territory: which is internationally recognised.
• Sovereignty: in which the political authority is effective and strong enough to assert itself throughout the
bounded territory.
• Government recognised by other states: often achieved through UN elected membership.
• Capacity to engage in formal relations with other states.
• Independence: self-governing.
• Permanent population which has the right to self-determination.
State power
The term state apparatus refers to the set of institutions and organisations through which state power is
achieved. These include:
• internal political and administrative organisations
• the strength of legal mechanisms
• the organisation of police and armed forces
• the ability to provide effective health, education and welfare systems
• the ability to regulate fiscal and monetary policies.
Globally there is inequality in the power and influence of states. Some states have the ability to dominate and
drive global systems and have significant influence on geopolitical events. Others have little influence and can
only react or respond to global change.
Economic power can be measured in terms of trade and wealth generated over long periods (Figure 9.4).
Figure 9.4 States with highest GDP in US$ (billions) – a measure of economic wealth and power,
2019 (Source: IMF World Economic Outlook http://knoema.com/nwnfkne/world-gdp-ranking-2019-
gdp-by-country-data-and-charts)
Military power may also depend on wealth and government policy (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5 Share of world military expenditure, 2018 (Source: SIPRI Military Expenditure Database,
2019)
Figure 9.6 Global pattern of state fragility, 2019 (Source: Fragile States Index, The Fund for Peace
https://fragilestatesindex.org/analytics/fsi-heat-map/)
A state may also be influential in the global spread of its cultural attributes, such as so-called ‘Americanisation’.
State power depends on the interrelation of economic, social, political and physical factors. Examples include:
• The ability to exploit natural resources; and geographical location.
• Human resources such as levels of education, and demographic structure.
• Industrial development, wealth, and the ability to regulate the economy.
• The strength of international trade and the ability to gain access to global supply chains.
• Internal political organisations, international relations and government policies.
These factors contribute to the relative fragility/resilience of a state.
The degree of resilience of a state is measured by the Fund for Peace (FFP) Fragile States Index. The global
pattern of state fragility/resilience (Figure 9.6) is based on a wide range of social, economic, political and military
indicators. Examples include measures of state security, protection of human rights and the impact of refugees. See
https://fragilestatesindex.org/indicators/.
Nation
The term nation refers to a large group of people with strong bonds of identity – they are united by shared
descent, history, traditions, culture and language.
Activities
1 With reference to Figure 9.6, describe the global pattern of state fragility.
2 For any one country, suggest two economic and two political factors that account for a high level of
state fragility. See Country Dashboard https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/and Yemen page
284, South Sudan page 291 and Mali page 295.
3 Evaluate the choropleth technique used to show the levels of state fragility in Figure 9.6.
See Chapter 15, Geographical skills, page 530 for further understanding of the choropleth technique.
A nation is different to a state. Spatially, a nation may be confined to one country, or its people may live in an
area across adjoining countries, and some may be scattered globally in the diaspora. Many states contain several
national groups.
Stretch and challenge
Table 9.1 Fragile States Index and Fund for Peace rankings for selected countries, and HDI, 2019
FFP
classification
Global
rank –
fragility
State Fragile
States
Index
HDI FFP
classification
Global
rank –
fragility
State Fragile
States
Index
H
Very high alert 1 Yemen 113.5 0.463 74 India 74.4 0.6
2 Somalia 112.3 n/a 83 Brazil 71.8 0.7
3 South
Sudan
112.2 0.413 91 Ukraine 71 0.7
4 Syria 111.5 0.549 Warning 102 Serbia 68 0.7
5 DRC 110.2 0.459 110 Ghana 65.9 0.5
High alert 6 CAR 108.9 0.381 118 Cuba 60.8 0.7
9 Afghanistan 105 0.496 Stable 125 Montenegro 55.3 0.8
Alert 12 Haiti 99.3 0.503 132 Bulgaria 50.6 0.8
21 Mali 94.5 0.427 More stable 140 Argentina 46 0.8
24 Pakistan 94.2 0.560 143 Italy 43.8 0.8
30 Liberia 90.2 0.465 147 Spain 40.7 0.8
High warning 34 Egypt 88.4 0.700 Very stable 153 USA 38 0.9
41 TimorLeste
85.5 0.626 155 UK 36.7 0.9
52 Iran 83 0.797 160 France 32 0.8
59 Turkey 80.3 0.806 Sustainable 165 Austria 25 0.9
Elevated
warning
64 Honduras 77.8 0.623 Very
sustainable
176 Switzerland 18.7 0.9
73 Russia 74.7 0.824 178 Finland 16.9 0.9
1 Outline and justify an appropriate technique to represent the Fragile States Index data shown in
Table 9.1.
2 a) Use a scatter graph and the value of Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient to assess the
strength and direction of the relationship between State Fragility and Human Development for the
selected countries in Table 9.1.
b) Suggest reasons to explain the nature of the relationship.
See Chapter 15, Geographical skills, pages 561–63 for analysing relationships and calculation of
Spearman’s rank.
Figure 9.7 Location and extent of Kurdistan (Source: Wars in the World)
An example is the Kurdish nation. Kurds are a non-Arab, Middle Eastern population inhabiting the region
known as Kurdistan. This is an extensive plateau and mountain area in Southwest Asia, including parts of eastern
Turkey, northeast Iraq, northwest Iran, and small areas of Armenia and northeast Syria (Figure 9.7). Traditionally a
nation of nomadic herders, Kurds are now mostly semi-nomadic or sedentary. Other examples of nations include
Maori, Basque and Sioux nations.
Nations do not have sovereignty; the Kurds are a nation united by culture but without a state or sovereign power. When a nation has an independent state of its own it is referred to as a nation-state. A nation-state is a state
that has sovereignty over a single nation. Japan and France are examples. The boundaries of the state coincide with
the geographical area inhabited by the nation.
In modern global politics nearly all states refer to themselves as nation-states, even though many contain
citizens of more than one nationality. This is partly because every government attempts to build a sense of national
identity among its citizens. In many nation-states the government actively promotes nationality, often through its
education system and media, in a process of nation-building.
Sovereignty
‘Sovereignty’ is the absolute authority that independent states exercise in the government of the land and peoples
of their territory. The global political system of independent states is therefore based on territorial sovereignty. This
is a fundamental principle in understanding modern political geography.
Sovereignty is sustained by two political processes:
• Internal sovereignty: an independent sovereign state has exclusive authority within its bounded territory and no
other state can intervene in its domestic politics.
• External sovereignty: a state cannot simply proclaim sovereignty; it has to be recognised by other sovereign
states. This ensures its territorial integrity and its ability to enter into international relations.
Sovereign authority exists beyond the dimension of spatial land area; it also applies to:
• space beneath the Earth’s surface, including rocks, soils and minerals
• agreed areas of sea and sea-bed resources
• agreed air space.
These are important principles because, in the globalised world of the twenty-first century, the concepts of
sovereignty and territorial integrity are increasingly being challenged. And these challenges have become potential
sources of conflict.
Territorial integrity
Territorial integrity is the principle that the defined territory of a state, over which it has exclusive and
legitimate control, is inviolable, i.e. it must be respected and can never be broken or infringed.
Territorial integrity and sovereignty are interrelated. States exercise their sovereignty within a specific territory,
the boundaries of which have been established by international law. This provides the framework for the current
international political structure based on territorial division and sovereign states.
The Charter of the United Nations, which aims to maintain international peace and security and develop friendly
relations among nations, specifically refers to the importance of territorial integrity, viz:
• Article 2.4: All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes
of the United Nations.
The preservation of territorial integrity and sovereignty is therefore important in achieving and maintaining
international security and stability in the world.
Understand the terms, norms, intervention and
geopolitics
An understanding of the terms ‘norms’, ‘intervention’ and ‘geopolitics’ is fundamental in appreciating that
sovereignty and territorial integrity are complex issues.
Norms
Norms are derived from moral principles, customs and ways of living that have developed over time throughout
the world. They are universally accepted standards of behaviour. The principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations are based on these long-established and universal norms.
These principles have become important norms for understanding sovereignty and territorial integrity. They are
enshrined in international law to be upheld by state governments and their citizens, and include:
• Article 2.1: this refers to the importance of sovereignty; the Organisation (the UN) is based on the principle of
sovereign equality of all its Members. This means that all member states have equal right to determine their own
form of government which they can choose without outside influence – self-determination. Governments are
able to make authoritative decisions with regards to the people and resources within their defined territory. But
they also have the responsibility to respect the sovereignty of other states.
• Article 2.4: as we have seen, refers to the importance of preserving territorial integrity and the political
independence of states.
These are the norms by which the global system of sovereign states with bounded territories is maintained. Further
examples of norms relating to sovereignty and territorial integrity include the obligations of states to:
• promote and develop friendly international relations
• protect their citizens
• respect, promote and fulfil human rights
• allow citizens to be involved in government
• allow citizens the freedom and opportunity to contribute to society.
In order to conform to these norms, governments are expected to put in place domestic measures and laws
compatible with the UN Charter and any other treaties they have ratified. Many norms are reinforced by
international treaties or conventions. Over time there has been an increasing number of norms and principles of
accepted behaviour established by the UN and in the charters of regional organisations such as the EU, AU and
ASEAN. Governments that have been unable to fulfil their obligations or responsibilities, often because some
aspect of their state apparatus is ineffective, rank high in the Fragile States Index (Table 9.1, page 275).
Intervention
Intervention is the action of a state, group of states, or international organisations in a foreign territory to end
gross violations of human rights. The intervention may be an attempt to resolve conflict and humanitarian crises
that arise from challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity. Examples of different types of intervention
include:
• economic sanctions such as trade embargoes or aid reduction against states that violate international norms of
behaviour
• military intervention, authorised by the UN, to protect the territory, population and resources of a country in
conflict or experiencing human rights violations
• peacekeeping missions of the UN, and other regional organisations such as NATO, that contribute to building
peace and security in conflict zones
• humanitarian assistance by Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) including NGOs and international aid agencies.
Intervention is controversial. It is argued that the principle of sovereignty, promoted by the UN, is undermined by
the very act of intervention even though sanctioned by the UN Security Council. Nevertheless intervention may be
deemed necessary in circumstances such as those shown in Figure 9.8.
Stretch and challenge
Responsibility to Protect is gaining ground as a new international security and human rights norm.
See www.globalr2p.org which includes detailed information on current crises/areas of conflict.
1 What are the underlying principles of RtoP?
2 Identify three organisations that are members of the International Coalition for RtoP.
Geopolitics
Geopolitics involves the global balance of political power and international relations. Geopolitical power is very
uneven throughout the world. The inequality in power between countries is explained by differences in their
wealth, the political strength of their governments, and their level of development (Table 9.2).
Figure 9.8 Examples of situations that might lead to intervention by international organisations
Table 9.2 Inequality in the power of different types of countries
Advanced Countries
(ACs)
These powerful countries, such as the USA, have wealth, high levels of
development and politically strong governments. They are in a strong position
to drive global systems such as international trade and international migration.
Low-Income
Developing
Countries (LIDCs)
These less powerful peripheral economies, such as Sierra Leone or Lao PDR,
have limited access to global markets and limited control over international
migration.
Emerging and
Developing
Countries (EDCs)
These rapidly growing economies, such as India and Brazil, are increasingly
powerful economically and politically.
See Introduction, page v, for the IMF country classifications.
In addition, supranational political and economic organisations such as the UN, EU, MERCOSUR, ASEAN and
OPEC exert strong geopolitical influence. And trans-state organisations such as TNCs have increasing impacts on
countries in which they locate as globalisation spreads and intensifies.
The geopolitics of intervention in sovereignty and territorial integrity issues is therefore very significant.
When the international community is called upon to intervene there are important geopolitical considerations
(Figure 9.9).
Global governance of sovereignty and territorial integrity issues is therefore complex and multi-faceted. The
term encompasses all types of intervention: economic, military, the humanitarian work of CSOs, including NGOs,
and reinforcement of a growing number of positive societal and political norms, laws and treaties. The
effectiveness of global governance depends on the interaction, co-operation and co-ordination of all organisations
involved, at every scale, including the state government (see South Sudan case study, page 291).
Figure 9.9 Intervention by the international community – geopolitical considerations
Review questions
1 Give two examples of sovereign states newly formed in the twenty-first century.
2 State one example of an AC, EDC and LIDC, according to the IMF classification.
3 What is the difference between the terms ‘state’ and ‘nation’?
4 What is meant by the terms ‘sovereignty’ and ‘territorial integrity’?
5 What do you understand by the term ‘norm’ in the context of sovereignty and territorial integrity?
6 State four possible circumstances in which intervention might be deemed necessary.
7 State four different ways that intervention might be imposed by the international community.
8 Why is intervention controversial?
9.2 What are the contemporary challenges to
sovereign state authority?
Key idea
• A multitude of factors pose challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity
Erosion of sovereignty and loss of territorial integrity are
influenced by economic, political, social and
environmental factors
Current political boundaries
The current system of nation-states with clearly defined political boundaries is based on the Westphalian
model. This system was established in the seventeenth century on the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the sovereign equality of all states. As we have seen, these principles continue to apply today; they
are reinforced in the UN Charter – a state cannot violate the sovereignty or territory of another state because, in
this respect, all are equal.
However, in the twenty-first century, sovereignty and territorial integrity have been challenged by many current
threats. Disruptive and destabilising forces have interacted to erode the long-established Westphalian concepts. As
a result, control of territory and its political boundaries, established by international law, have been increasingly
contested. Examples of these challenges, both from within and between sovereign states, are shown in Table 9.3.
Table 9.3 Erosion of sovereignty and loss of territorial integrity associated with current political boundaries
Contested territory Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in Ukraine;
UK and Argentinian claims over the Falkland Islands; contested islands
in South and East China Seas.
Separatism Current claims for separatism include secession by Basque and
Catalan national groups in Spain and France; and by Scottish
nationalists in the UK.
Factional or sectarian
tensions
Where political and ethnic conflict challenge sovereignty and territorial
integrity, for example, in the Middle East and North Africa.
Transnational movements
of terrorist and extremist
activity
Where movements of foreign fighters, oil, weapons and military supplies
across international borders have threatened territorial integrity and
sovereign control of countries such as Turkey and Syria.
Legacy of colonialism For example, where arbitrary political boundaries and European
administration of territory caused ethnic partitioning in the ‘scramble for
Africa’. (See Tuareg and Azawad in the Mali case study on page 295.)
Contested maritime
boundaries
Disputes over natural resources and exploration rights: such as the
boundary dispute in Atlantic waters off the Ivory Coast and Ghana over
exploitation of oil reserves.
Stretch and challenge
The International Boundaries Research Unit (IBRU) at Durham University conducts research into
global boundary matters and related geographical issues, including the changing nature of sovereignty,
territory, citizenship and political organisation of space.
1 Outline the issues involved in any one current boundary dispute at www.dur.ac.uk/ibru/news/.
2 With reference to IBRU maps, describe the areas of the Arctic region claimed by bordering countries
(www.dur.ac.uk/ibru/resources/arctic/).
3 Suggest reasons why some maritime boundaries in the Arctic are difficult to establish.
Figure 9.10 Soldiers patrol the India–Pakistan Line of Control, Kashmir. Transnational movement of
terrorism across this border (Figure 9.3, page 272) is a challenge to sovereignty and national
security
Transnational corporations
Transnational corporations (TNCs) are large corporate enterprises which operate in more than one country.
For example, Nike, the US sports equipment and clothing company, outsources manufacturing to over 530
factories in 41 countries and employs over a million people worldwide.
There are growing numbers of TNCs, not only emanating from advanced countries but increasingly from the
outward FDI of emerging and developing countries. TNCs have become a driving force of global economic
integration. Many countries, especially LIDCs, have become reliant on TNCs to integrate their economy into the
global economy and to encourage development. And in so doing, TNCs have brought many benefits to poorer
countries.
But TNCs have brought disadvantages too, many of which present challenges to government control and in
effect to state sovereignty. In the last two decades many TNCs have expanded their operations regardless of state
boundaries. And such is their economic power that some nation-states have in part lost control of territory, work
force, environment, and in some instances their own political decision-making. These decisions have been strongly
influenced by the large corporations on which they depend for economic growth and development.
Many TNCs have been criticised for pursuing their own profit-making interests at a cost to the countries in
which they have invested:
• Business decisions to invest or disinvest, affecting the lives of many people, have been taken outside the host
country which has little or no involvement.
• Disrespect for human rights by some TNCs is another challenge to sovereignty; exploitation of working
populations, payment of low wages, demands for overtime and long hours, poor working conditions and use of
child labour are all abuses of human rights levelled at some large businesses.
These are issues over which the state government may have little control, affecting its ability to protect citizens
within its own territory. The dilemma for small, peripheral economies is that they are dependent on the economic
and social benefits derived from TNC investment such as local multiplier effects, the lifting of population above
poverty levels and the stimulation of other affiliated industries.
It is not surprising that these challenges to sovereignty are a concern for international organisations such as the
UN and OECD. Both have established guidelines, setting out TNC and state government responsibilities.
Nike has been criticised in the past for its negative impacts. Its stated aims now are to shed this reputation and
conform to guidelines published in its policies on human rights, labour conditions, equality and environmental
sustainability. Nike and other large TNCs such as Nestlé, Toyota and Royal Dutch Shell all attempt to achieve their
corporate social responsibility and apply the ten principles of the UN Global Compact (see
www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/mission/principles). By incorporating these principles into their strategies,
TNCs uphold their responsibilities and reduce any challenge they might pose to sovereign state authority.
Supranational institutions
Supranational institutions represent a tier of governance above that of the individual state. Examples include
international organisations at global scale such as the UN and its agencies including the IMF and WTO, and at
regional scale such as NATO and large regional trading blocs including the EU, ASEAN, MERCOSUR and
ECOWAS.
Within supranational institutions member states retain their sovereignty: they are independent countries, have
equal rights, and exercise exclusive control over, and responsibility for, their citizens. But having achieved
membership they are also bound to the requirements of the supranational body, including any treaties they sign. In
this respect, member states are said to ‘surrender’ some aspects of their sovereignty since they must comply with
the international or regional laws of these institutions.
The European Union
The EU is a trading bloc which is not only an economic union but also a political union with its own parliament
and a monetary ‘Eurozone’.
There are 27 sovereign member states (Figure 9.11), but their integration in the EU can bring challenges to their
individual power and autonomy.
• On the one hand there are benefits of integration which protect states’ interests. These include the ability to
address transnational issues such as air and water pollution and international crime; and economic and trade
advantages such as protection of industry by common tariff and access to a large European market.
• However, these same states are also required to implement EU laws and decisions even if they did not vote for
them. They cannot pass laws in the interests of their own state if they conflict with those of the EU. And the 19
members of the Eurozone have additional financial restrictions such as being unable to set their own interest
rates, and being forced to accept harsh austerity measures and contribute to large bail-out funds, as for Greece’s
debt crisis in 2015.
Figure 9.11 The 27 independent states of the European Union, 2021
Other aspects of EU membership which limit sovereign power of individual member states include enforced
fishing quotas in the Common Fisheries Policy, and compliance with EU regulations governing Basic Payments
Schemes and Countryside Stewardship under Common Agricultural Policy.
United Nations
Each of the 193 sovereign states in the UN is a member of the General Assembly. As we have seen in the UN
Charter, sovereignty and territorial integrity are important norms (Articles 2.1, 2.4) which underpin the global
political system. And despite the effects of globalisation, the system of nation-states is still the basic framework for
international law; it is the state which has responsibility for its bounded territory and its citizens as well as relations
with other states.
Nevertheless, what appears to conflict with these norms is that the UN, with the backing of the Security Council,
has the right to sanction intervention as in Articles 41 and 42 (see
https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/CTC/uncharter.pdf). These norms are increasingly applied by the
international community when a state fails to protect its citizens.
At the General Assembly World Summit in 2005, a UN resolution reaffirmed that the primary responsibility to
protect its citizens still lies with the individual state, but intervention should apply in instances of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing. The international community will intervene in a state
without its consent only when that state is allowing violation of human rights to occur or if it commits them itself.
Political dominance of ethnic groups
The geographical distribution of ethnic groups does not always coincide with current political borders.
• A sovereign state may include more than one ethnic group within its territory: South Sudan is estimated to
include 60 different ethnic groups or indigenous tribes, of which the Dinka and Nuer peoples are the largest.
• A single ethnic group may be partitioned by modern state borders: as we have seen, Kurdistan extends across five
states in Southwest Asia (Figure 9.7, page 275), and the Tuareg homeland stretches across five states in North
and West Africa (see Mali case study, Figure 9.24, page 295). In each instance, national borders bear little
resemblance to these areas of common culture and ethnicity.
Challenges to the territorial integrity of a state come from ethnic groups that have strong identity, culture and
political organisation and demand full independence to create a new state. This is the case for the Tuareg in Mali,
who claim independence and the right to self-determination in Azawad.
Challenges to the sovereignty of a state occur where internal conflict between ethnic groups results in a
government being unable to protect all its citizens. Conflict between the Dinka and Nuer has been fuelled by
political differences between leaders and politicians that originate from these different ethnic groups in South
Sudan.
For more on South Sudan, see the case study on pages 291–94.
The Basque Nation
Challenges to territorial integrity and sovereignty have arisen in Spain and France where the Basque nation has
long struggled for independence.
The Basque country straddles the international border of northern Spain and southwest France (Figure 9.12).
The area is centred on the western end of the Pyrenees and includes seven provinces, four in Spain and three in
France, with a population of more than 3.1 million.
Basque people have a distinctive culture, including a unique language (Euskara) which is taught in schools.
Many traditions and cultural features are maintained in the architecture, food and dance of the area. The Basques
have a strong tradition of independence and they have achieved political autonomy, including the Basque
parliament.
Basque nationalists have demanded the right to self-determination and even full independence from France and
Spain. To this end the separatist movement, ETA, has carried out violent acts in the past. This has been in the face
of a history of suppression of Basque identity by the French and Spanish governments, who see this as a threat to
their sovereign power and potentially their territorial integrity.
Following the ETA ceasefire in 2011, protests by Basque separatists have been peaceful; this includes actions of
the Ernai group that continues to support Basque independence, the right to self-determination and territorial unity
(Figure 9.13).
Figure 9.12 The seven historic provinces of the Basque Country are divided into three
administrative regions
Figure 9.13 Claims for Basque independence are strongly supported, but today the protests are
more peaceful
Case study: Yemen: a country in which sovereignty has been
challenged
The Republic of Yemen is a relatively new sovereign state created in 1990 by the merger of North
Yemen and former communist-run South Yemen. Situated at the southern end of the Arabian
Peninsula, the landscape is largely mountains and desert. Land borders are shared with Saudi Arabia
and Oman and there are Red Sea and Gulf of Aden coastlines (Figure 9.14). The population, about 29
million, is mostly located in the highlands of the west (Figure 9.15). Sanaa, the capital, has over 2
million people and coastal settlements include the strategic ports of Aden, Al Hudaydah, and Al
Mukalla.
Yemen is a Low-Income Developing Country. GDP has fallen in recent years (in 2019, $2285 per
capita, PPP); sectoral contributions are: agriculture 20 per cent; industry 12 per cent and services 68
per cent. The HDI score of 0.463 placed it 177th among UN member states in 2019. Yemen has risen
to first place in the State Fragility Index – it is the world’s most fragile state.
Figure 9.14 Yemen and neighbouring countries
Figure 9.15 Yemen – population density
Causes and challenges to the government
The different ways in which Yemen’s sovereignty has been challenged include:
• Yemen’s Houthi Shia Muslim movement has ousted the internationally recognised government from
power. In armed conflict with government forces, the Houthis have seized control of the north and
west of the country, including Sanaa the capital city (Figure 9.14). Their claim is that the government
was corrupt and mismanaged the country. Specific reasons included the government’s inability to
deal with food insecurity, unemployment, poverty and inequality in internal economic development.
There have been demands for electoral reform owing to unfair levels of Houthi representation in
government.
• Intervention by a Saudi-led coalition could also be viewed as a challenge to the sovereignty of
Yemen. The Houthi claim that their revolutionary council is the legitimate government of Yemen. But
in 2015 the conflict escalated when the Saudi-led coalition made air strikes against the Houthis in an
attempt to restore the internationally recognised government. This action is controversial and,
although requested by the deposed President, it is not clear that it complies with Article 42 of the UN
Charter. Consequent damage and loss of life inflicted on the civilian population are against
international humanitarian law.
• Separatist anti-Houthi groups in the south of the country have been seeking independence for South
Yemen. This move towards secession has challenged not only the sovereignty of Yemen but also its
territorial integrity. Separatists seized control of the port of Aden (Figure 9.15), but this conflict was
ended recently by an agreement made with the government.
• There have been reports of terrorist activity which have arisen amongst the chaos of the civil war: Al
Qaeda attacks against US military personnel in Aden and the US embassy in Sanaa, and so-called
Islamic State attacks on Shia mosques in Sanaa (Figure 9.16) threaten sovereignty.
Impacts on people and places
Challenges to the government and sovereignty of Yemen have created a major humanitarian disaster
(Table 9.4, page 286).
Figure 9.16 Sanaa, Yemen’s capital city
Activities
Threats to Yemen’s sovereignty are complex and contested; consequences have been social,
economic and political.
1 Use the BBC News link at www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-14704951 and your own
research to produce a timeline of the main political events contributing to the challenges to Yemen’s
sovereignty.
2 Study reports of the UN’s Resident Humanitarian Co-ordinator in Yemen at
https://reliefweb.int/organization/un-hc-yemen and Human Rights Watch reports on Yemen to
update impacts of the conflict on people and places.
Table 9.4 Impacts on people and places in Yemen
People Places
• According to the UN, the conflict between
government forces and Houthi rebels has led
to the death or injury of 17,700 civilians.
• In the ensuing humanitarian disaster, the UN
estimates that 80% of the population (more
than 22 million people) require humanitarian
assistance or protection.
• The UN estimates that 20 million people are
food insecure including 8.4 million at risk of
starvation.
• Severe acute malnutrition threatens the lives of
2 million children under the age of 5 years and
1 million pregnant or breastfeeding women.
• Yemen’s health system has collapsed; hospital
treatment is severely restricted. OCHA
estimates that 17.8 million people lack access
to safe water and sanitation; 19.7 million
people lack access to adequate health care.
There has been a large cholera outbreak.
• It is estimated that thousands of people have
been displaced by the fighting, many
relocated in camps for Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs).
• Military personnel and civilians have been
killed or injured by landmines.
• The civil war has a negative impact on the
national economy; agriculture and businesses
have been decimated
• Five million children have no access to
education.
• Sanaa – in 2015 Houthi rebels overran the capital
following protests in the streets urging the
government to step down.
• Sanaa – air strikes have caused civilian casualties
and destruction of buildings. Satellite images and
witness reports show that civilian gatherings,
residential neighbourhoods, markets, schools,
mosques and infrastructure including roads and
airports have been affected.
• In the northern governorate of Al-Jawf (Figure
9.14, page 284), the UN reported 31 civilians
killed in one Saudi-led air strike on 15 February
2020.
• Northern Yemen – lack of co-operation between
Houthi militants and various aid agencies has
obstructed the distribution of medicines and food
(provided under the UN’s World Food
Programme), giving rise to undernutrition.
• Marib (Figure 9.14, page 284) – UN reports of
attacks on hospitals, including Marib General, a
government hospital, severely limiting medical
services for about 15,000 people including many
vulnerable IDPs.
• Al Hudayah – the entry port for much of the aid
going into Yemen. Assaults by Saudi-backed
government forces on this rebel held port have
impeded the delivery of aid.
Review questions
1 Give three ways in which the sovereign power of a state can be weakened.
2 Give three ways in which the UN attempts to maintain peace and security.
3 How does NATO attempt to resolve conflict?
4 What is the role of NGOs in conflict zones?
5 Why are treaties important in regulating conflict?
6 State three economic impacts of the conflict in South Sudan.
7 State three social impacts of the conflict in South Sudan.
8 Identify three benefits of intervention in South Sudan for local communities. Refer to specific
localities.
9.3 What is the role of global governance in conflict?
Key idea
• Global governance provides a framework to regulate the challenge of conflict
How challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity can
be a cause of conflict
The ways in which challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity can be a cause of conflict are outlined in
Figure 9.17.
From a geographical perspective, challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity and resulting conflict have
occurred in all types of countries – LIDCs, EDCs and ACs – and in every continent. Details are provided in this
chapter in the case studies of Yemen, South Sudan and Mali and in the Basque, Kashmir and East Timor examples.
Most of the challenges in these instances have led to serious political and military conflict.
Patterns of conflict/peacefulness are shown on the Global Peace Index map (Figure 9.18). The map is available
at http://visionofhumanity.org/indexes/global-peace-index/; it is interactive and provides details of indices used to
calculate the index of peacefulness score for every country. The Institute for Economics and Peace has ranked
countries according to a composite score based on 23 different ‘peace’ indicators. These are grouped into three
main categories: militarisation; safety and security; and domestic and internal conflicts. Examples of indices
relating specifically to conflict include: number and duration of internal conflicts; deaths from internal conflicts;
likelihood of violent demonstrations within the country; number, duration and role of a country in external
conflicts; number of deaths from external conflicts. In 2019 the four most peaceful countries were Iceland, New
Zealand, Portugal and Austria, and the four least peaceful were Afghanistan, Syria, South Sudan and Yemen.
Figure 9.17 How challenges to sovereignty and territorial integrity can be a cause of conflict
Natural resources: water supply conflict, Kashmir
Sovereignty over Kashmir has been contested between Pakistan and India since the partition of India in 1947
(Figure 9.3, page 272). Periodic firing across the border by both countries has caused deaths of military personnel
and internal displacement of thousands of poor farmers and their families. Troops are even stationed high in the
Karakoram Range at over 6000 m to control the territory of the Siachen Glacier, a major source of the River Indus.
Although there are ethnic, cultural and religious differences, water insecurity is at the heart of the Kashmir
dispute. The Indus is a very important natural resource to both countries for irrigation and hydro-electric power. Mediated by the World Bank, the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960 shared the waters of the Indus and is still in force.
But Pakistan, occupying the lower part of the Indus Basin, complains that India adversely affects its water supplies
by damming the upper tributaries which flow through that part of Kashmir under Indian control.
This dispute is one of escalating importance for both countries owing to:
• the rapid growth of their populations, increasing demand for water
• the water resource itself depleting as global warming causes Himalayan glaciers to retreat.
The dispute remains unresolved, requiring greater co-operation between the two countries.
Figure 9.18 The Global Peace Index, 2019 (Institute for Economics and Peace)
Activities
1 With reference to Figure 9.18, describe the global pattern of peace.
2 What are the similarities and differences in the global pattern of peace (Figure 9.18) and the global
pattern of state fragility (Figure 9.6, page 274)? Suggest reasons for your answer.
The role of institutions, treaties, laws and norms in
regulating conflict and in reproducing the global system
of sovereign nation-states
The sovereign nation-state is the basis of the global political system. Intervention by the international community
is used when sovereignty is threatened by genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
Institutions involved in the intervention process include the UN, NATO, regional economic and political
groupings such as the EU and ASEAN, and civil society organisations including many international NGOs. These
institutions have different roles in establishing and reinforcing treaties, laws and norms. They are all significant in
regulating conflict and in reproducing, or maintaining, the global system of sovereign nation-states – often through
co-operation and co-ordination of their strategies.
Activities
A useful way of investigating conflicts is to access the interactive map of the US Global Conflict Tracker
available at www.cfr.org. Choose an example:
1 Identify reasons for conflict.
2 Explain how sovereignty/territorial integrity is challenged.
The role of institutions
The United Nations
The UN, founded in 1945, is an international organisation of 193 elected member states. Its headquarters is in New
York City, but its historic home is the Palais des Nations, Geneva. Originally built to house the League of Nations,
overlooking Lake Geneva in Switzerland (Figure 9.19), today it hosts UN Agencies that have very significant roles
in regulating conflict. These include the Office of the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights (OHCHR), the
UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) and the UN Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
In regulating conflict the UN aims to:
• achieve worldwide peace and security
• develop good relations between nations
• foster co-operation among nations.
The UN Charter gives the Security Council primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
Figure 9.20 illustrates the ways in which the UN does so. Most of these practices have become difficult to achieve
in the twenty-first century; preventative diplomacy and mediation are therefore increasingly important. Monitoring
and observation have also taken on greater significance, enabling peacekeeping operations to be deployed earlier.
Figure 9.19 Palais des Nations, Geneva – UN European headquarters and one of the largest
diplomatic conference centres in the world (Source: David Barker)
The UN operates all its policies as part of a global partnership. This helps to give its interventions legitimacy,
sustainability and global reach. Currently, in 2021, there are 12 peacekeeping missions; see
https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/where-we-operate for details. These are backed by the legal and political authority
of the UN Security Council, the UN Secretariat departments that carry out the day-to-day responsibilities of the
UN, the support of the host country, and the use of personnel and finance contributed by member states. The UN
has the important role of co-ordinating the input of all organisations involved in areas of conflict.
Also see South Sudan and Mali case studies on pages 291 and 295 for examples of UN peacekeeping
missions.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NATO is an alliance of European and North American countries. Its purpose is to safeguard the freedom and
security of its 30 members through political and military means.
• Politically: NATO promotes democratic values and encourages consultation and co-operation on defence and
security issues to help prevent conflict.
• Militarily: NATO attempts to achieve peaceful resolution of disputes. If diplomatic measures are ineffective, it
has the military capacity and mandate needed to undertake crisis management operations either alone or in cooperation with other countries and international organisations.
Figure 9.20 How the UN maintains international peace and security
The European Union
After the Second World War, the aim of the EU was to foster economic co-operation on the understanding that
international trade between member countries would enhance economic interdependence, making them more likely
to avoid conflict.
In addition, today the EU has an important security role, providing forces from member states on an ad hoc basis
for rapid response operations. This is achieved by OSCE (Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe).
The work of OSCE includes conflict prevention and resolution through border management, arms control,
promoting human rights, combating human trafficking, observing and assisting in democratic elections and
enhancing cyber security. The EU also aims to regulate conflict through its policies (Table 9.5 on page 290).
Stretch and challenge
ASEAN has a similar approach to the EU in terms of conflict prevention. Use the information in the
Political-Security Community section of its website at www.asean.org/communities/asean-politicalsecurity-community to investigate ways in which ASEAN aims to prevent conflict in its region.
Non-government organisations
International civil society organisations (CSOs), including NGOs, intervene in many different ways in conflict
zones. They work in co-operation with global institutions, national and local governments and citizens resident in
local communities within the conflict zones. This includes:
• provision of humanitarian relief including health care, medicine, education, food and water
• monitoring the situation and providing early warnings of any new violence
• organising direct mediation and open dialogue between adversarial parties
• strengthening local institutions, rule of law and democratic processes such as elections
• reinforcing the growing number of norms, treaties and laws; NGOs can be particularly effective at local scale
through education ‘in the field’, working with individuals, families and local community groups
• promoting basic human rights.
Table 9.5 EU policies specifically linked to conflict
Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy
• Preserve peace and international security
• Promote international co-operation
• Develop and consolidate respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
rule of law and democracy
Common Security
and Defence Policy
• Joint disarmament operations
• Humanitarian and rescue tasks
• Military advice and assistance
• Conflict prevention and peacekeeping
• Crisis management, including peace-making and post-conflict stabilisation
European
Partnership and
Southern
Neighbourhood
Policies
Eastern Partnership and Southern Neighbourhood policies are key elements of
EU foreign relations. The EU aims to co-operate with 16 of its close neighbour
states in Eastern Europe, North Africa and the Middle East in terms of security,
stability and prosperity. See https://ec.europa.eu/info/policies/europeanneighbourhood-policy_en.
Examples include Amnesty International, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Oxfam and
ACCORD, the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes (see also NGOs in the South Sudan and
Mali case studies, pages 291 and 295).
The role of treaties, laws and norms
Treaties, laws and norms are formulated by international organisations such as the UN, EU and ASEAN. They
govern the legal and generally accepted practices designed to regulate conflict, maintain peace and maintain the
system of sovereign nation-states.
Treaties
A treaty, or convention, is a written international agreement between two or more states and/or international
organisations. States that sign and ratify a treaty are bound to it by international law. Many multilateral treaties have been adopted by the UN. One example relating to conflict is ‘The Convention on
the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction’.
By 2020, 164 countries had signed or ratified this legally binding agreement. It remains open for signature by
others, including China, India, Russia and the USA. The Broken Chair sculpture in Place des Nations, Geneva is a
monument to many thousands of victims of land mines, and it serves as a reminder to all countries to sign the
treaty (Figure 9.21).
Laws
A primary goal of the UN is to develop international law based on multilateral treaties it has adopted. International
law defines responsibilities of states in their conduct with each other and treatment of their citizens. In terms of
conflict, there are laws relating to human rights, disarmament, refugees, nationality issues, treatment of prisoners,
use of force and conduct of war.
International law also regulates conflict over global commons. These are resource domains or areas which lie
outside political reach of any one nation-state, including the high seas, the atmosphere, Antarctica and outer space.
There are legal and institutional frameworks which address environmental issues of the global commons, including
for example the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCOL).
Norms
Norms are significant in the regulation of conflict since treaties and laws are derived from norms. Norms are longestablished, common practices in many countries set out in the UN Charter; they in turn are formalised and
reinforced by treaty and legal requirements.
Figure 9.21 The Broken Chair, Place des Nations, Geneva (Source: David Barker)
Cyber conflict is an increasing risk and a threat to sovereignty in our highly interconnected world. Six new
norms relating to cyber security have been suggested by Microsoft, the US multinational technology
corporation. The development of international cyber security norms is an important step in limiting potential
conflict and protecting national security. Importance is placed on achieving global acceptance of these new norms
in partnership with international organisations such as the UN, NATO, state governments and other actors
involved.
The role of flows of people, money, ideas and technology
in geopolitical intervention
Flows of people and money are an integral part of the global governance of conflict. Attempts by the international
community to intervene and provide assistance in conflict zones include UN missions and the involvement of
regional organisations such as NATO. These all require movement of personnel into conflict zones and transfer of
finances donated by member states. In some instances, this amounts to more than 10,000 people and over US$1
billion per UN mission per year (see South Sudan and Mali case studies, below and on page 295). An example is
the UNIFIL mission in Lebanon. The Mission Fact Sheet at
https://peacekeeping.un.org/sites/default/files/unifil_peacekeeping_mission_fact_sheets.pdf shows details such as
national contributions of military and police personnel, and use of the US$0.48 billion budget for 2019–20. In
addition, the input of NGOs requires flows of staff, volunteers and aid workers into conflict zones plus flows of
financial aid from fund raising and donations. The money pays for operating costs such as equipment, transport
and administration.
Ideas are exchanged in planning and carrying out intervention strategies. Consultation between organisations
involved, including flows of intelligence, are inherently important in effective governance of conflict. Flows of
ideas and information are a feature of bilateral and multilateral meetings of governments, regional council
meetings, UN conferences and discussion at the UN General Assembly. As an example, UNDP is helping to coordinate the work of many NGOs in Lebanon.
There is increasing dependence on technology in peacekeeping. The advanced technology of the military such as
satellite imagery, remotely controlled drones and weaponry is used for surveillance and air strikes. Also the growth
of modern ICT enables information to be supplied via the internet, international databases and the media.
Communications via mobile telephony and web-based social network services are indispensable for transnational
networking in the monitoring of behaviour and in conflict management.
Key idea
• Global governance involves co-operation between organisations at scales from global to local, often
in partnership
Case study: Strategies for global governance in South Sudan,
an area of conflict
South Sudan, the world’s newest sovereign state, gained independence from Sudan in 2011. It is a
landlocked country in east-central Africa (Figure 9.22) with a population of 15 million in 2020. Since
independence it has become one of the world’s least peaceful countries and most fragile states. There
has been political instability, civil war, ethnic rivalry – a key underlying cause of the war – and poor
governance. It is one of the poorest countries in Africa; although there are oil reserves, government
revenue depends heavily on foreign aid. The cumulative effects of a decade of armed conflict have
undermined development and left the country with a serious humanitarian crisis:
• People’s livelihoods have been destroyed; most of the population relies on subsistence agriculture.
• 4.2 million people have been forced to leave their homes (resulting in 2 million IDPs and 2.2 million
refugees).
• There is acute and persistent food insecurity.
• An estimated 7 million people require humanitarian assistance. Most of these are women and children
who have been subjected to gender-based violence and forced labour, including child soldiers and
sex trafficking.
• There is a narrow industrial base and limited production capacity; 96 per cent of South Sudan’s
exports are crude oil.
• There’s limited access to basic services, such as health, education, housing and sanitation.
• Government investment has focused on defence and security rather than on sectors that would help
reduce poverty.
Figure 9.22 Political boundaries of Sudan and South Sudan (Source: www.cia.gov/the-worldfactbook/countries/south-sudan/map)
• Poverty is acute and widespread with 82 per cent of the population living below the global poverty line
of US$1.90 per day.
• There’s a lack of basic infrastructure, such as paved roads, electricity and water supply.
• South Sudan has one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world after continued economic decline
since independence.
• HDI has also gradually declined since independence. In 2019, its ranking was 0.413, 186th
.
• Despite significant decrease in armed hostilities since the peace agreement of 2018, accessing arms
remains easy.
• There have been recent UN reports of ethnic cleansing in different parts of the country.
Interventions and interactions of organisations at a range of scales, including the
United Nations, a national government and an NGO
Intervention by the international community has been necessary to resolve conflict, ease suffering and
promote development. Effective intervention depends on co-ordination of strategies and co-operation
of organisations involved; these include the UN and its agencies, the Government of National Unity,
and many NGOs.
The United Nations
This intervention involves flows of people (peacekeeping personnel), money (funding from the UN and
NGOs), ideas (based on field research and monitoring) and technology (biometric registration,
medicines) into South Sudan (Table 9.6).
The South Sudanese government
In 2013, political infighting between President Kiir (Dinka) and Vice-President Machar (Nuer) turned
into serious armed conflict – an intense civil war fought along ethnic lines. Intervention became
necessary as the government was failing to protect its citizens and a humanitarian crisis was
escalating. The obstructive and intransigent attitude of the government made interaction with the UN
and NGOs very difficult.
Table 9.6 The roles of UN organisations and agencies in response to conflict in South Sudan
OCHA
Co-ordination
This UN body serves as humanitarian co-ordinator for UN agencies, NGOs, regional
organisations such as IGAD and the South Sudanese government. Its role is to
improve the effectiveness of the international response by negotiating access within
each state, mobilising the funding and monitoring progress.
UNMISS
Peacekeeping
The UNMISS aims to protect civilians, monitor human rights, support implementation
of the cessation of hostilities agreement and support delivery of humanitarian
assistance. It has sent over 16,000 personnel (including 14,000 troops and 2000
police) and had a budget of US$1.27 billion for 2019/20.
UNICEF
Children
UNICEF aims to overcome obstacles preventing children reaching their full potential,
such as disease, violence, poverty and discrimination. UNICEF has field offices
throughout South Sudan that help to reach as many children and mothers as possible
despite poor infrastructure.
UNHCR
Refugees
The UNHCR works closely with the national government to deliver assistance and
protection services to refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs).
WFP
Food
The WFP supports vulnerable people affected by conflict, displacement, reduced
crop production and famine, helping to meet their food and nutrition needs.
IOM
Migrants
IMO works closely with migrants, government and humanitarian partners to track and
monitor IDPs. It also conducts village assessment surveys for effective reintegration
of returnees.
WHO
Health
The WHO implements strategies to reduce maternal and child morbidity and mortality
rates, prevent communicable and non-communicable diseases, strengthen the
country’s health systems and address environmental and social determinants of
health.
By 2020 a ‘revitalised Transitional Government of National Unity’ (R-TGoNU) had been formed
following a power-sharing agreement between Kiir and the rebel parties, including Machar. This
brought the prospect of co-operation and peace in South Sudan. IGAD (Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for Eastern Africa) played an important role in mediating this process.
But there are still major obstacles to overcome. Peace has been jeopardised by Kiir and Machar
disagreeing on sharing control of the country’s ten states (Figure 9.23). In addition, there have been
UN reports of looting of humanitarian supplies by armed youth groups, roadside attacks interfering with
aid operations, mismanagement of government spending on services, government officials pillaging
public funds, dissident communities being marginalised and continued inter-communal conflict by cattle
raiding in the dry season. Nevertheless, UN agencies and NGOs are attempting to interact with
government departments over issues such as food, shelter and human rights protection (Table 9.6).
NGOs in South Sudan
The South Sudan NGO Forum is a platform through which NGOs, national government, the UN and
donors can share information, establish state-level co-ordination and develop guidelines for effective
aid strategies. Information is available at http://southsudanngoforum.org/. In 2020, members of the
forum included:
• 263 national NGOs, such as Upper Nile Youth Development Organisation and Grass-Root Integrated
Network for Development (GRIND)
• 116 international NGOs, such as World Vision International, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), Save
the Children and Care International.
The NGOs address humanitarian aid and development needs. They are attempting to forge working
relationships with government authorities and local communities but their work is hindered by violent
attacks on aid workers. Terre des Hommes (Tdh) is a Swiss NGO currently working in communities in
the southeast of the country. Its work involves: supplying families with basic necessities, such as
shelter, clean water and sanitation; helping to increase local food production and education in nutrition;
providing food in schools and safe areas for child protection.
Figure 9.23 The states and administrative areas of South Sudan, 2020
Activity
Conduct further research into the interventions of Terre des Hommes in South Sudan. Full details are
available at https://www.tdh.ch/en/our-interventions/south-sudan. Investigate exactly where this
international NGO is working in the field, the value and effectiveness of what it does, and its
interactions with partner organisations.
Consequences of global governance of the conflict for local communities
Table 9.7 Benefits of global governance of conflict for local communities
Emergency food
supply
Aid agencies have co-ordinated their efforts to position essential supplies
during the dry season, enabling easier access to food during the wet season
when roads are difficult.
Food security Villagers have received training under the WFP to maintain livestock health,
use fishing equipment and crop production techniques to improve longer-term
food security.
Family reunification,
child and maternal
health
UNICEF has helped children, releasing them from armed forces, tracing their
families, and returning them to school. In partnership with WFP, many have
been treated for severe, acute malnutrition and provided with access to clean
drinking water. Women have been supported with antenatal care visits and
childbirth attended by skilled birth attendants.
Education NGOs such as Save the Children in South Sudan are working to provide safe
and uninterrupted education to children affected by conflict. This supports
SDG Target 4 within the UNDP for quality education and lifelong learning
opportunities. This includes training teachers and providing materials, for
example, in Upper Nile and Jonglei states.
Health, disease
control
The WHO, South Sudan’s Ministry of Health, UNICEF and Gavi, the vaccine
alliance, are improving health by Ebola testing, providing cholera kits,
immunisation against measles and anti-malarial treatment especially in areas
subject to flooding such as Jonglei, Upper Nile, Warrap and Eastern Equatoria
states.
Protection, shelter Despite the peace agreement, in 2020, 190,376 people were seeking safety in
UN Protection of Civilian sites in Bentiu, Malakal, Juba, Bor, and Wau. These
sites provide shelter, sanitation and food during the rainy season for displaced,
vulnerable people.
Infrastructure,
accessibility
OCHA has negotiated access to remote areas throughout the country to reach
outlying communities, but transport is difficult. Co-ordinated efforts between
UNDP, UNOPS and World Bank are helping to improve accessibility by
connecting communities with road infrastructure projects in remote areas of
Warrap, Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria states.
Review questions
1 Identify three ways in which state sovereignty may be challenged.
2 Give three located examples of challenges to the territorial integrity of a state.
3 Give three examples where ethnic groups have claimed independence and right to selfdetermination.
4 In what ways do supranational organisations challenge the sovereign power of their member states?
5 In what ways can TNCs challenge the sovereignty of a state?
6 Outline three social impacts of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
7 Outline three economic impacts of the conflict in Yemen.
8 Identify two impacts of the challenge to Yemen’s sovereignty on Sanaa, the capital city.
9.4 How effective is global governance of
sovereignty and territorial integrity?
Key idea
• Global governance of sovereignty and territorial integrity has consequences for citizens and places
How the global governance of sovereignty issues has
consequences for citizens and places
Where sovereignty has been threatened, global governance by the international community aims to re-establish
effective political control by the state and restore the social and economic life of the country. Such interventions
have consequences, not only for the state government but also for its citizens and the communities in which they
live. Intended positive effects are outlined in Table 9.8.
How the global governance of territorial integrity issues
has consequences for citizens and places
Sovereignty and territorial integrity are interrelated. Table 9.9 shows benefits of global governance where
territorial integrity has been threatened.
Unintended effects of military intervention which may exacerbate already existing inequalities and injustices
include:
• increased numbers of civilian casualties
• displacement of population (IDPs and refugees)
• damage to housing/residential districts
• damage to infrastructure, including roads, limiting access to services such as clean water, health care, medicines
• food insecurity as farmers are unable to grow crops/tend livestock
• disruption to education
• escalation of violence and human rights violation, including ethnically targeted attacks and attacks on aid
workers.
Table 9.8 Intended benefits of global governance for citizens and places where sovereignty has been threatened
Short-term effects Longer-term effects
Humanitarian aid, via aid agencies
and donated funds
Agricultural training to improve food security
Supply of food Education programmes, which aim to prevent further conflict, help
post-conflict rehabilitation and support minority groups
Access to supplies of clean
drinking water
Building of democratic institutions
Supply of medicines and medical
treatment
Technical assistance to improve legislative and administrative
frameworks
Provision of shelter/safe havens for
IDPs
Support democratic and fair electoral processes
Assistance for vulnerable refugees
and returnees
Upholding of human rights, including training of police and military,
and reinforcement of norms, treaties, laws
Maintain peace, strengthen rule of
law and protect civilians
Integrate gender equality into policies and practices
Table 9.9 Intended benefits of global governance for citizens and places where territorial integrity has been threatened
Short-term effects Longer-term effects
Security and protection of civilians in conflict zones Mediation and fostering of co-operation
Periods of ceasefire negotiated and monitored Development of sustainable food and water
supplies
Border control to facilitate movement of people and
goods
Improving trade relationships to help reduce
effects of economic shock
Short-term effects Longer-term effects
Human rights of minority groups/women and
children/civilians monitored for further response
Improve business environment by countercorruption and diminishing terrorism financing
Early warning of renewed/potential conflict Cyber defence
Reduce forced conscription of child soldiers Restore territory according to international law
Rule of law strengthened Support transition to democracy/fair elections
and representation
Assistance for IDPs and their return Re-establish state authority and state apparatus
Case study: The impact of global governance of
sovereignty/territorial integrity in Mali
There are significant socio-economic and environmental contrasts in Mali. The north is a vast area of
desert and semi-desert in which the Tuareg are the dominant ethnic group (Figure 9.24). The south has
the most economic activity as well as the capital, Bamako, located on the Niger (Figure 9.25).
Figure 9.24 Tuareg at the Festival au Désert near Timbuktu, Mali
Gold, cotton and agricultural exports generate income but overall this is a very poor, landlocked
country which depends heavily on foreign aid and migrant remittances.
Figure 9.25 Dyeing and rinsing cotton cloth on the bank of the Niger river near Bamako, Mali
Sovereignty/territorial integrity issues
Challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali include:
• Separatism: the Tuareg ethnic group has declared independence for Azawad, an area of northeast
Mali.
– The claims for secession are based on Tuareg territorial and cultural rights in this area. The current
international boundaries in this part of West Africa were drawn up by European colonial powers
over 100 years ago. There was little regard for tribal lands and this resulted in arbitrary division of
the Tuareg between Mali and neighbouring countries (Figure 9.26).
– The Tuareg seek greater autonomy in Azawad (Figure 9.27). This area has been marginalised and
neglected by the Bamako-based national government, 1000 km to the south. The most recent
military coup in 2012 was caused by dissatisfaction with the government for its ineffective
governance of the north and failure to handle the many conflicts in the area.
• Terrorism and extremist activity: in addition to separatist rebellions there have been attacks by
Islamist groups.
– There has been rapid growth in insurgency from new armed groups. These include those linked to
Al-Qaeda, Islamic State, and others with ethnic or political affiliations. There have been serious
extremist attacks on Malian and regional military forces and UN and French peacekeeping forces.
– Trafficking of people, smuggling of arms and other contraband have occurred across the remote
porous borders between Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso. Security has been threatened by extremists
trying to create a safe haven in the Sahel as a base for attacks elsewhere.
– Schools have been targeted which reduces access to education and increases vulnerability to sex
exploitation, forced labour and recruitment of children to armed forces. Health facilities have been
destroyed and ethnic and inter-community rivalries have been exploited in attacks on civilians.
Global governance strategies
The response of the international community to Mali’s sovereignty and territorial integrity issues is
summarised in Table 9.10.
Figure 9.26 Tribal lands of the Tuareg in Sahelian and Saharan Africa (Source: http://trama-eordito.blogspot.co.uk/2012/04/tuareg-lo-spirito-degli-uomini-blu.html)
Opportunities for stability, growth and development and challenges of inequality and
injustice
Global governance in Mali is beginning to provide opportunities for stability, economic growth and
development. But the rate of progress is slow and the challenges of inequality and injustice remain
(Table 9.11).
Figure 9.27 Location of Azawad in northeast Mali
Table 9.10 Global governance strategies in Mali
United Nations Stabilisation
Mission
12,000 military personnel, 1700
police
2019–20 budget US$1.14 billion
MINUSMA:
• Support for 2015 Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, legal and
democratic elections, and opening of dialogue with terrorist
leaders.
• Restoration of state authority/rule of law.
• Protection of civilians/human rights.
• Promoting co-operation between security forces.
Selected UN agencies:
working with the government of
Mali and other partners
• UNHCR: integration of refugee and IDP returnees.
• OCHA: co-ordination of operations for all involved, data exchange
over food security/malnutrition.
• WFP: food security; operates UN Humanitarian Air Service for
access to remote communities.
• UNDP: agenda for sustainable development – SDGs.
• UNICEF: rights of the child in health, hygiene, education,
protection against child marriage.
Malian government and
regional organisations
National military forces supported by:
• regional forces from G5 Sahel countries for security
• ECOWAS and African Union for mediation.
Examples of other national
contributions
• Security: 5100 French troops – significant, long-term security; the
British military are training forces in the Sahel in counter-terrorism
• Youth training project: Japanese financial support partnering
UNDP.
Examples of NGOs in Mali:
Care; Solidarités International;
Oxfam International; MSF
NGO strategies include reducing: food insecurity, poverty,
inequalities and injustices such as gender inequality; improving living
conditions; providing medical aid; attempting negotiation with rebel
groups to allow access to people in most need.
The Sahel Alliance: World
Bank, African Development
Launched in 2017 to provide a co-ordinated response to the
development and security challenges faced by G5 Sahel countries –
Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Chad.
Bank, EU, UNDP, and
European countries
Table 9.11 Opportunities for stability, growth and development, and the challenges of inequality and
injustice in Mali
Opportunities Challenges
Global governance strategies create opportunities …
To increase stability by:
• preserving Mali’s territorial integrity and restoring
sovereign state control and rule of law in the
centre and north
• allowing some degree of autonomy for the north,
with regionally elected leaders, fairer
representation in national government and
greater allocation of state budget
• ensuring peaceful, legal and democratic national
elections – essential to stability in Mali
• protecting civilians, communities and their
livelihoods through improved security and
reduction in terrorist activity.
To achieve growth by:
• strengthening governance of the mining sector
(gold is the main export) for economic growth
• improving access to global supply chains, and
diversifying industry to reduce Mali’s
vulnerability to commodity price fluctuations
• incorporating the north into the national economy
by accelerating infrastructure projects such as
rural electrification, road and air access
• encouraging youth training schemes to provide
skills that will lead to gainful employment.
To further development by tackling:
• Health – improving access to health facilities,
reducing malnutrition and food insecurity,
improving living conditions and disease
protection.
• Education – increasing school enrolment and
retention, training teachers, reducing attacks on
schools by terrorist groups.
• Poverty – helping subsistence farmers to
become more resilient using sustainable
techniques, helping small holders to improve
their products and gain access to markets.
See UNDP Human Development Indicators for
Mali at:
http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/MLI.
These data include useful statistics for various
development indices, gender inequalities and
human rights injustices.
Global governance organisations face remaining
challenges to reduce inequality and resolve
injustices.
Inequality:
• Globally, Mali is one of the poorest and least
developed countries; per capita GDP (2020
PPP) US$2569 – 166th; HDI (2019) 0.427 –
184th.
• Internally, Malians experience a high level of
income inequality (Gini coefficient 40.1, 2020)
and serious impacts of gender inequality.
• Socio-economic inequalities between the north,
which is poorly funded and has limited service
provision, and the south and central regions.
• Deep-rooted cultural and linguistic divisions
between ethnic groups are a challenge for
peace; conflict between Dogon and Fulani over
land and water resources is increasing as
climate changes and extremist activity
interferes.
• Urban–rural contrasts demonstrate inequalities
in provision of infrastructure and access to basic
services such as health clinics, electricity and
water supply, and sewage systems.
Injustices:
• Government inability to protect citizens from
human rights abuses, especially children and
women who are subjected to a disproportionate
amount of domestic and agricultural work, child
marriage, female genital mutilation and genderbased violence.
• The government’s inability to police its own
country and provide security against extremist
activity; extrajudicial killings, abduction/people
trafficking, rape, forced marriage, military
conscription of children, burning of schools and
health centres, use of land mines and drug
smuggling have been increasing.
• Many people fleeing violence have been
displaced internally or in neighbouring countries.
• There’s poor female representation in the
National Assembly; few women are involved in
decision making.
• Access to education is poor, especially for girls.
There’s a low adult literacy rate.
• There are high rates of infant mortality, maternal
mortality and adolescent birth rate. Life